NewSteppablePipelineDoc (#112)
PowerShell/Community-Blog: Posts/2023/01/Mastering-The-Steppable-Pipeline.md

Consider the following two objects being converted to a Csv list:

```PowerShell
$a = [pscustomobject]@{ name='John'; address='home'}
$b = [pscustomobject]@{ name='Jane'; phone='123'}
$a, $b |Format-Table
```

Results

```Console
name address
---- -------
John home
Jane
```

Notice that there is no `phone` column, meaning that the `phone='123'` property is missing from the results. This is actually due to the one-at-a-time processing: at the moment the `Format-Table` cmdlet receives object `$a` it is supposed to process it immediately by writing it to the console and release it in order to be able to process any following items. The issue is that the `Format-Table` cmdlet is yet unaware of the next object `$b` (which isn't even instantiated and not even exist yet in the pipeline) but the initial output is already written to the console.
In other words, a cmdlet written for one-at-a-time processing bases its output on the first object received from the pipeline. This also implies that if you change the order of the items in the pipeline (e.g. with `$a,  $b  Sort-Object | Format-Table`) properties might reappear and/or disappear.  

### Processing blocks

> As you might have noticed, some actions, like outputting a header, are only required only ones. As in the analogy with the assembly line, heating up a soldering gun is only required ones when the pipeline is started, cleaning up the station is only required when the pipeline is completed. Similar time consuming ("expensive") actions could be required for a cmdlet as e.g. open and closing a file. These actions are respectively defined in the `Begin` - and  `End` block of a cmdlet. The actual processing is defined in the `Process` block of cmdlet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you might have noticed, some actions, like outputting a header, are only required once. As in the analogy with the assembly line, heating up a soldering gun is only required once, when the pipeline is started. Cleaning up the station is only required when the pipeline is completed. Similar time consuming or expensive actions could be required for a cmdlet, such as opening and closing a file. These actions are respectively defined in the `Begin` and  `End` blocks of a cmdlet. The actual processing of items is defined in the `Process` block of cmdlet.
```

A well defined pipeline PowerShell cmdlet might look like this:

```PowerShell
function MyCmdlet {
    [CmdletBinding()] param(
        [Parameter(ValueFromPipeLine = $True)][String] $InputString
    )
    Begin {
        $Stream = [System.IO.StreamWriter]::new("$($Env:Temp)\My.Log")
    }
    Process {
        $Stream.WriteLine($_)
    }
    End {
        $Stream.Close()
    }
}
```

> Using the above cmdlet example with the command like `1..9 | MyCmdlet`, the log file is *only opened once* at the start of the pipeline, than each item in the pipeline is process one-at-a-time and at the end the log file is closed (*once*).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When running this example cmdlet in a pipeline like `1..9 | MyCmdlet`, the log file is *only opened once* at the start, then each item in the pipeline is processed one-at-a-time, and the log file is closed (*once*) at the end.
```

Note that when there are no `Begin`, `Process` and  `End` processing blocks defined in a function, the content of the function is assigned to the `End` block. See also: [about Functions Advanced Methods](https://learn.microsoft.com/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.core/about/about_functions_advanced_methods)

A similar pipeline can be created with the common [`Foreach-Object`](https://learn.microsoft.com/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.core/foreach-object) cmdlet using the `-Begin`, `-Process` and `-End` parameters to define the corresponding process blocks:

```PowerShell
1..9 | Foreach-Object -Begin {
    $Stream = [System.IO.StreamWriter]::new("$($Env:Temp)\My.Log")
} -Process {
    $Stream.WriteLine($_)
} -End {
    $Stream.Close()
}
```

### Performance

> With the above explanation of the pipeline, you might understand now why you shouldn't wrap cmdlet pipeline in other pipeline, like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this understanding of the pipeline, you can see why you shouldn't wrap a cmdlet pipeline inside another pipeline, like:
```

```PowerShell
1..9 | ForEach-Object {
    $_ | MyCmdlet
}
```

> Wrapping a cmdlet pipeline into another (`ForEach-Object`) pipeline is very expensive because you're also invoking the `begin` and `end` block of `MyCmdlet` which will open and close the concerned log file for each specific item instead of only once (at the beginning and the end of the pipeline). The performance degradation appears with native cmdlets along with `Export-Csv -append` and `Add-Content`. See also [PowerShell scripting performance considerations](https://learn.microsoft.com/powershell/scripting/dev-cross-plat/performance/script-authoring-considerations#avoid-wrapping-cmdlet-pipelines)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wrapping a cmdlet pipeline into another (`ForEach-Object`) pipeline is very expensive because you're also invoking the `begin` and `end` block of `MyCmdlet`. This will open and close the log file for each item instead of only once at the beginning and the end of the pipeline. The performance degradation can happend with any cmdlet that takes pipeline input. See also [PowerShell scripting performance considerations](https://learn.microsoft.com/powershell/scripting/dev-cross-plat/performance/script-authoring-considerations#avoid-wrapping-cmdlet-pipelines).
```

## The steppable pipeline

> Unfortunately, it is not always possible to create a single syntactical pipeline as you might e.g. need different branches for different parameters, as output paths, along the road. Consider a very large `csv` file which you want to cut in smaller batch files. The obvious approach is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, it is not always possible to create a single syntactical pipeline. For example, you might need different branches for different parameters values or as output paths. Consider a very large `csv` file that you want to cut in smaller files. The obvious approach is to split it into files with a maximum number of lines:
```

```PowerShell
$BatchSize = 10000

> Import-Csv .\MyLarge.csv | ForEach-Object -Begin { $Index = 0 } -Process {
>     $BatchNr = [math]::Floor($Index++/$BatchSize)
>     $_ | Export-Csv -append .\Batch$BatchNr.csv
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Import-Csv .\MyLarge.csv |
    ForEach-Object -Begin { 
        $Index = 0
    } -Process {
        $BatchNr = [math]::Floor($Index++/$BatchSize)
        $_ | Export-Csv -Append .\Batch$BatchNr.csv
    }
```

```

But as stated this before, this will open and close each output file (`.\Batch$BatchNr.csv` ) 10,000 times where it only needs to be opened and closed once per output file. So, the solution here is to use a steppable pipeline which lets you independently define the processing blocks for the required output stream:

```PowerShell
$BatchSize = 10000

> Import-Csv .\MyLarge.csv | ForEach-Object -Begin { $Index = 0 } -Process {
>     if ($Index % $BatchSize -eq 0) {
>         $BatchNr = [math]::Floor($Index++/$BatchSize)
>         $Pipeline = { Export-Csv -notype -Path .\Batch$BatchNr.csv }.GetSteppablePipeline()
>         $Pipeline.Begin($True)
>     }
>     $Pipeline.Process($_)
>     if ($Index++ % $BatchSize -eq 0) { $Pipeline.End() }
> } -End { $Pipeline.End() }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Import-Csv .\MyLarge.csv |
    ForEach-Object -Begin {
        $Index = 0
    } -Process {
        if ($Index % $BatchSize -eq 0) {
            $BatchNr = [math]::Floor($Index++/$BatchSize)
            $Pipeline = { Export-Csv -notype -Path .\Batch$BatchNr.csv }.GetSteppablePipeline()
            $Pipeline.Begin($True)
        }
        $Pipeline.Process($_)
        if ($Index++ % $BatchSize -eq 0) { $Pipeline.End() }
    } -End {
        $Pipeline.End()
    }
```

```

> Every 10,000 (`$BatchSize`) entries, the modules (`%`) is zero and a new pipeline is created for the expression `{ Export-Csv -notype -Path .\Batch$BatchNr.csv }`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every 10,000 (`$BatchSize`) entries, the modulus (`%`) is zero and a new pipeline is created for the expression `{ Export-Csv -notype -Path .\Batch$BatchNr.csv }`.
```

> * The `$Pipeline.Begin($True)` invokes the `Begin` block of the steppable pipeline  which opens an new `csv` file named `.\Batch$BatchNr.csv` and writes the headers to the file
> * The `$Pipeline.Process($_)` invokes the `Process` block of the steppable pipeline using the current item (`$_`) which is appended to the `csv` file
> * The `$Pipeline.End()`invokes the `End` block of the steppable pipeline which closes the `csv` file named `.\Batch$BatchNr.csv` which holds a total of 10,000 entries.  
> (Note that it is important to end the pipeline but there is no harm in invoking the `$Pipeline.End()` multiple times.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `$Pipeline.Begin($True)` invokes the `Begin` block of the steppable pipeline, which opens an new `csv` file named `.\Batch$BatchNr.csv` and writes the headers to the file.
* The `$Pipeline.Process($_)` invokes the `Process` block of the steppable pipeline using the current item (`$_`), which is appended to the `csv` file.
* The `$Pipeline.End()`invokes the `End` block of the steppable pipeline which closes the `csv` file named `.\Batch$BatchNr.csv`. This file holds a total of 10,000 entries.  

(Note that it is important to end the pipeline but there is no harm in invoking the `$Pipeline.End()` multiple times.)
```

> It is a little more code, but if you measure the results you will see that in this situation the later script is more that 50 times faster than the one with the wrapped cmdlet pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is a little more code, but if you measure the results you will see that in this situation the later script is more than 50 times faster than the one with the wrapped cmdlet pipeline.
```

### Multiple output pipelines

> With the steppable pipeline technique, you might even have multiple output pipelines open at ones. Consider that for the very large `csv` file in the previous example, you do not want batches of 10,000 entries but divide the entries over 26 files based on the first letter of the `LastName` property:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the steppable pipeline technique, you might even have multiple output pipelines open at once. Consider that for the very large `csv` file in the previous example, you do not want batches of 10,000 entries but divide the entries over 26 files based on the first letter of the `LastName` property:
```

```PowerShell
$Pipeline = @{}

> Import-Csv .\MyLarge.csv | ForEach-Object -Process {
>     $Letter = $_.LastName[0].ToString().ToUpper()
>     if (!$Pipeline.Contains($Letter)) {
>         $Pipeline[$Letter] = { Export-CSV -notype -Path .\$Letter.csv }.GetSteppablePipeline()
>         $Pipeline[$Letter].Begin($True)
>     }
>     $Pipeline[$Letter].Process($_)
> } -End {
>     foreach ($Key in $Pipeline.Keys) { $Pipeline[$Key].End() }
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Import-Csv .\MyLarge.csv |
    ForEach-Object -Process {
        $Letter = $_.LastName[0].ToString().ToUpper()
        if (!$Pipeline.Contains($Letter)) {
            $Pipeline[$Letter] = { Export-CSV -notype -Path .\$Letter.csv }.GetSteppablePipeline()
            $Pipeline[$Letter].Begin($True)
        }
        $Pipeline[$Letter].Process($_)
    } -End {
        foreach ($Key in $Pipeline.Keys) { $Pipeline[$Key].End() }
    }
```

> The process cannot access the file '.\Data.txt' because it is being used by another process.  

In this situation, chocking the pipeline and reading the complete file first avoids the error.

### Heavy objects

Objects in the PowerShell pipeline contain more than just the value of the item. They also include properties such as the name and type of the item and of all the properties. Take, for example, the .NET `DataTable` object. The header of a `DataTable` object contains the column (property) names and types where each row in the `DataTable` only contains the value of each column. If you convert a `DataTable` into a list of PowerShell objects, like:
```PowerShell
$Data = $DataTable | Foreach-Object { $_ }
```

PowerShell converts each row into a new object, duplicating the header information for each row. The memory usage considerably increases even if the value is just a few bytes. This extra overhead shouldn't be an issue if you stream the objects through the pipeline because there will only be a few objects in the pipeline at any time.

### Missing properties

> Consider the following two objects being output to a table:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nevertheless, there is a pitfall in using the pipeline.
Consider the following two objects being output to a table:
```
